.\" **************************************************************************
.\" *                                  _   _ ____  _
.\" *  Project                     ___| | | |  _ \| |
.\" *                             / __| | | | |_) | |
.\" *                            | (__| |_| |  _ <| |___
.\" *                             \___|\___/|_| \_\_____|
.\" *
.\" * Copyright (C) Daniel Stenberg, <daniel@haxx.se>, et al.
.\" *
.\" * This software is licensed as described in the file COPYING, which
.\" * you should have received as part of this distribution. The terms
.\" * are also available at https://curl.se/docs/copyright.html.
.\" *
.\" * You may opt to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute and/or sell
.\" * copies of the Software, and permit persons to whom the Software is
.\" * furnished to do so, under the terms of the COPYING file.
.\" *
.\" * This software is distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY
.\" * KIND, either express or implied.
.\" *
.\" * SPDX-License-Identifier: curl
.\" *
.\" **************************************************************************
.TH libcurl-env-dbg 3 "18 September 2023" "libcurl" "libcurl"
.SH NAME
libcurl-env-dbg \- environment variables libcurl DEBUGBUILD understands
.SH DESCRIPTION
This is a set of variables only recognized and used if libcurl was built
"debug enabled", which should never be true for a library used in production.
These variables are intended for internal use only, subject to change and have
many effects on the behavior of libcurl. Refer to the source code to determine
how exactly they are being used.
.RS
.IP "CURL_ALTSVC_HTTP"
Used to circumvent the AltSvc HTTPS protocol restriction.
.IP "CURL_DBG_SOCK_WBLOCK"
Percentage of send() calls that should be answered with a EAGAIN at random. For
TCP/UNIX sockets.
.IP "CURL_DBG_SOCK_WPARTIAL"
Percentage of data that shall be written to the network. For TCP/UNIX sockets.
This is applied to every send. Example: CURL_DBG_SOCK_WPARTIAL=80 means a send
with 1000 bytes would only send 800.
.IP "CURL_DBG_QUIC_WBLOCK"
Percentage of send() calls that should be answered with EAGAIN at random. QUIC
only.
.IP "CURL_DEBUG"
Used to configure trace logging behavior as an alternative to calling
\fIcurl_global_trace(3)\fP. For example CURL_DEBUG=http/2
.IP "CURL_DEBUG_SIZE"
Used to fake the size returned by CURLINFO_HEADER_SIZE and
CURLINFO_REQUEST_SIZE.
.IP "CURL_GETHOSTNAME"
Used to override the local machine's unqualified hostname for NTLM and SMTP.
.IP "CURL_HSTS_HTTP"
Used to circumvent the HSTS HTTPS protocol restriction.
.IP "CURL_FORCETIME"
Used to set a time of 0 for AWS signatures and NTLM.
.IP "CURL_ENTROPY"
Used to set a fixed faked value to use instead of a proper random number so
that functions in libcurl that are otherwise getting random outputs can be
tested for what they generate.
.IP "CURL_SMALLREQSEND"
Used to set an alternative size of HTTP data to be sent at a time only if
smaller than the current.
.IP "CURL_SMALLSENDS"
Used to set an alternative size of socket data to be sent at a time only if
smaller than the current.
.IP "CURL_TIME"
Used to fake time of AltSvc, HSTS and CURLINFO variables that are time related.
This variable is also used to fake the data returned by some CURLINFO variables
that are not time-related, and in that case the value is not a time string. For
example CURLINFO_LOCAL_PORT data can be set.
.IP "CURL_TRACE"
Used for debugging the lib/ldap implementation.
.IP "CURL_NTLM_WB_FILE"
Used to set to a debug-version of the \fIntlm-wb\fP executable.
.IP "CURL_OPENLDAP_TRACE"
Used for debugging the OpenLDAP implementation.
.RE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR libcurl-env "(3)"
