.\" **************************************************************************
.\" *                                  _   _ ____  _
.\" *  Project                     ___| | | |  _ \| |
.\" *                             / __| | | | |_) | |
.\" *                            | (__| |_| |  _ <| |___
.\" *                             \___|\___/|_| \_\_____|
.\" *
.\" * Copyright (C) 1998 - 2022, Daniel Stenberg, <daniel@haxx.se>, et al.
.\" *
.\" * This software is licensed as described in the file COPYING, which
.\" * you should have received as part of this distribution. The terms
.\" * are also available at https://curl.se/docs/copyright.html.
.\" *
.\" * You may opt to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute and/or sell
.\" * copies of the Software, and permit persons to whom the Software is
.\" * furnished to do so, under the terms of the COPYING file.
.\" *
.\" * This software is distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY
.\" * KIND, either express or implied.
.\" *
.\" * SPDX-License-Identifier: curl
.\" *
.\" **************************************************************************
.\"
.TH CURLOPT_SAFE_AUTH 3 "18 Jan 2022" "libcurl 7.82.0" "curl_easy_setopt options"
.SH NAME
CURLOPT_SAFE_AUTH \- do not use clear password authentication
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
#include <curl/curl.h>

CURLcode curl_easy_setopt(CURL *handle, CURLOPT_SAFE_AUTH, long bitmask);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
Pass a long that holds a bitmask of CURLSAFE_* defines. Each bit is a Boolean
flag disabling unsafe authentication mechanisms for a particular target.
When set, a bit rejects authentication mechanisms that would
transfer clear passwords on a non-encrypted connection.

Available bits are:
.IP CURLSAFE_AUTH
Disable unsafe authentication mechanisms with the target server.
.IP CURLSAFE_PROXYAUTH
Disable unsafe authentication mechanisms with the proxy server.

.RE
These disabling bits have precedence over mechanisms selected by other options.
.SH DEFAULT
0: allow all uses of unsafe authentication mechanisms.
.SH PROTOCOLS
FTP, HTTP, IMAP, LDAP, POP3 and SMTP
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
CURL *curl = curl_easy_init();
if(curl) {
  CURLcode ret;

  curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_URL, "http://user:password@example.com/");
  curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_SAFE_AUTH, CURLSAFE_AUTH);
  ret = curl_easy_perform(curl);
  curl_easy_cleanup(curl);
}
.fi
.SH AVAILABILITY
Added in 7.82.0
.SH RETURN VALUE
Returns CURLE_OK if the option is supported, and CURLE_UNKNOWN_OPTION if not.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR CURLOPT_HTTPAUTH "(3), " CURLOPT_LOGIN_OPTIONS "(3)"
