.\" **************************************************************************
.\" *                                  _   _ ____  _
.\" *  Project                     ___| | | |  _ \| |
.\" *                             / __| | | | |_) | |
.\" *                            | (__| |_| |  _ <| |___
.\" *                             \___|\___/|_| \_\_____|
.\" *
.\" * Copyright (C) 1998 - 2020, Daniel Stenberg, <daniel@haxx.se>, et al.
.\" *
.\" * This software is licensed as described in the file COPYING, which
.\" * you should have received as part of this distribution. The terms
.\" * are also available at https://curl.se/docs/copyright.html.
.\" *
.\" * You may opt to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute and/or sell
.\" * copies of the Software, and permit persons to whom the Software is
.\" * furnished to do so, under the terms of the COPYING file.
.\" *
.\" * This software is distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY
.\" * KIND, either express or implied.
.\" *
.\" **************************************************************************
.\"
.TH CURLOPT_PROXY_CAINFO_PEM 3 "14 Nov 2020" "libcurl 7.74.0" "curl_easy_setopt options"
.SH NAME
CURLOPT_PROXY_CAINFO \- string with proxy Certificate Authority (CA) bundle in PEM format
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <curl/curl.h>

CURLcode curl_easy_setopt(CURL *handle, CURLOPT_PROXY_CAINFO_PEM, char *pem_string);
.SH DESCRIPTION
This option is for connecting to an HTTPS proxy, not an HTTPS server.

Pass a char * to a null-terminated string with PEM encoded content holding one
or more certificates to verify the HTTPS proxy with.

If \fICURLOPT_PROXY_SSL_VERIFYPEER(3)\fP is zero and you avoid verifying the
server's certificate, \fICURLOPT_PROXY_CAINFO(3)\fP need not even indicate an
accessible file.

The application does not have to keep the string around after setting this
option.
.SH DEFAULT
Built-in system specific
.SH PROTOCOLS
Used with HTTPS proxy
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
const char* strpem;
/* user must fill strpem with content of a PEM file */
CURL *curl = curl_easy_init();
if(curl) {
  curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_URL, "https://example.com/");
  /* using an HTTPS proxy */
  curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_PROXY, "https://localhost:443");
  curl_easy_setopt(curl, CURLOPT_PROXY_CAINFO_PEM, strpem);
  ret = curl_easy_perform(curl);
  curl_easy_cleanup(curl);
}
.fi
.SH AVAILABILITY
Added in 7.74.0

This option is supported by the OpenSSL backends..SH RETURN VALUE
Returns CURLE_OK if the option is supported, CURLE_UNKNOWN_OPTION if not, or
CURLE_OUT_OF_MEMORY if there was insufficient heap space.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR CURLOPT_PROXY_CAPATH "(3), "
.BR CURLOPT_PROXY_SSL_VERIFYPEER "(3), " CURLOPT_PROXY_SSL_VERIFYHOST "(3), "
.BR CURLOPT_CAPATH "(3), "
.BR CURLOPT_SSL_VERIFYPEER "(3), " CURLOPT_SSL_VERIFYHOST "(3), "
